---
layout: default
title: Finite Freedom: Papers, Please and Systems of Control
date: 2013-10-03
---

Systems of control hide in plain sight within modern video games. Whereas in the past, games were satisfied to display and even flaunt heir linearity, such as the scrolling world map in Ghosts and Goblins (1985), present day games advertise freedom of choice, branching player- controlled narratives, and interactive decision-making. In short, the player is no longer on rails, but can determine their own ending. In this essay, I will illustrate the paradox of systems of control in video games, focusing specifically on a recent game that reveals the more freedom from linearity and systems of control a video game seems to offer, not only do these systems become harder to detect, but also the marketing of dynamic narrative becomes another
manipulation and limitation of play in itself.


To illustrate this, I will take an in-depth look at Papers, Please, by independent developer
Lucas Pope. Papers, Please is a multi-platform computer game that has been classified by the gaming press as an indie-simulation, but what I define as an interactive narrative similar to the text-adventure games of Infocom or visual novels of Japan, with elements of role-playing dialogue as popularized by western developer Bioware. Developed in late 2012 using the open- source Haxe programming language and the NME framework, Papers, Please was released in fall 2013 to high critical and player praise. As of October, 2013, it holds a score of 85 on the review aggregate site Metacritic. The player acts as the protagonist in Papers, Please, playing a government agent stationed at an immigrant checkpoint in the fictional eastern-european Arstotzka. Tasked with checking the identification of immigrants, visitors, and workers entering Arstotzka, players must compare traveler documents with primitive inspection, search, and fingerprint systems to determine who can enter and who will be rejected or arrested.


The flow of the game is broken up into 31 days each lasting six real-world minutes. Players are paid money according to how many people they correctly process. At the end of a game day, a results screen shows the players their income, and provides the option to spend money on several quantitative measurements (Galloway 100), such as food and medicine for their family, housing utilities, or attributes and tools that can facilitate their work day such as tabs for an information handbook. In order to survive, and ensure their family’s survival, players must process immigrants quickly and correctly. Over the course of the 31 days, players face new and increasingly complex security obstacles, such as work badges and wanted posters, as well as non-playable characters (NPCs) who offer a variety of tasks and choices. This is where the framework of Papers, Please’s interactive narrative begins to take shape.


Friedrich von Borries defines narrative as "a story or a tale communicated via word of mouth or written text” (26). Papers, Please features 20 endings to its narrative, each of which are determined by player choices over the course of a playthrough. A basic example of an early ending is as follows: at the beginning of the player's shift, an Arstotzkan official approaches the security station and speaks with the player. He specifies that an important visitor will be arriving today and the player needs to make sure she is let through. The player can either follow these instructions, verify the visitor, and continue their playthrough, or they can reject the visitor, and receive a “bad ending." In this particular ending, the player is scolded by the official and fired, and a blurb details the player and their family starving. The previous example is only one instance in a litany of events and choices presented throughout Papers, Please; the narrative will bifurcate several times over the span of 31 days. Something interesting happens when the player is presented with their first ending. Depending on how they have played up to that point, the player will receive a certain ending in addition to a signifier of “Ending X of 20." This signifier lets the player know a few things that are not readily apparent while playing through the narrative. The player realizes that they have not only seen but a fraction of what Papers, Please has to offer, but also if they want to see all of the endings, they must travel down the forking paths throughout the story.


It is through this manner that I classify Papers, Please as an interactive narrative, which underneath the graphics is identical to a visual novel with multiple endings. Wardrip-Fruin defines this complex underlying system as “The Tale-Spin Effect,'' in which the generation of a story is present only at the process level and imperceptible to the audience (137). The world created by Pope in Papers, Please is a claustrophobic, dystopian reality, filled with pitiable immigrants, cloak-and-dagger revolutionaries, and Stalinesque officials, and its endings range from heart-crushing to the protagonist merely surviving. Underneath this affectation, lo-fi graphics, and emotional reaction from the player is a text adventure or interactive fiction (IF). Player’s move through days, comparable to rooms in IF, face puzzles, and proceed towards a range of endings. Reduced even further, the choices posed in Papers, Please can be classified as a choice between two doors labeled “Yes" and “No,” and a certain number of endings are only accessible through a certain combination of doors. Papers, Please may provide color- commentary and world-building, but these choices act as points to be tallied, waypoints in the path towards a specific ending. This is done through it’s depiction of dialogue trees.


While Papers, Please markets itself as a dystopian simulation game, it borrows an element of western RPGs, specifically dialogue trees. Representing the signposts towards a specific ending, the dialogue tree is also an extrapolation of a featured mechanic of multi-path, morality- driven games such as Mass Effect (2007) and Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003). Two western RPGs developed by Bioware, the Mass Effect and KoToR series are frequently cited as examples that create a narrative based around player choice. Over the sixty-plus hour quest, players can opt for differing moral choices and decisions, and by the end of the game a chaotic player’s character and experience will be drastically different from an honorable player’s. In western RPGs, when an NPC’s ask questions, the dialogue tree takes the form of a circle composed of three answers of good, neutral, and evil disposition. The player selects their answer, watches the consequence, and continues on their story. A criticism of this type of mechanic, and one that Papers, Please fixes diegetically, is that it causes passivity in the player. Players remain outside the game, selecting an answer for the avatar to perform.


The dialogue trees in Papers, Please is less restrictive and more diegetic than those in western RPGs. Say the player is assigned the “side-quest” of arresting a wanted criminal, for example. The following plays out: the criminal approaches the security booth. The player recognizes the criminal. The criminal offers a bribe. The player can accept the bribe and report the criminal, accept the bribe and let the criminal pass, reject the bribe and either allow or reject the criminal, call security, or do nothing until the criminal is irritated and offers more money. Choice is not merely presented in words, it is in actions. The decision tree is embedded in objects and actions as well as dialogue, opening up gameplay possibilities where the player is not sure what an NPC wants explicitly, or if they are performing all necessary actions to accomplish their own intentions. By expanding the choice tree into action, Papers, Please not only turns choice into puzzle, the game remains diagetic: sentences do not float on the screen for a pointer to click. The magic circle remain intact, and the player maps their gamespace without ever leaving their security station. Papers, Please contains its world on one screen, and demonstrates Friedman’s concept of a story-map: “geography itself is not the protagonist; rather, the protagonist’s experience of geography structures the narrative” (Friedman 17). Along with the narrative and game-world, players shape a manifestation of the story web in the form of a visual diary, map, and series of forking paths in the saved-game screen. This leads to another facet of Papers, Please: its literal mapping of the story-space.


As the player’s play through Papers, Please, their game is automatically saved at the beginning of each day. On the initial playthrough, the saved-game screen (Figure 2.) will appear linearly across the sequential days. The player will reach an ending, and as discussed previous, will have the urge to see other endings after discovering their existence. Loading is performed by clicking the box corresponding to a certain date, and player can go back to any previous day. As player’s replay days and decide on different paths in the narrative, the story will branch off into different route to signify the separate paths. Papers, Please draws on the connected rooms found in interactive text adventures to map an interactive narrative in which the character structures. While the endings are preexisting, players draw on past, present, and future events to shape the gamespace. In this way, players are using past experiences as navigation devices, and the saved- game screen becomes a world hub similar to Super Mario 3 (1988) or Demon’s Souls (2009). By forming an image of a map, the saved-game screen becomes another element of navigation, along with the dialogue tree.


Papers, Please also uses time to create tension in the player. As the days progress, the player
needs a greater sum of money to support their family, who can fall ill and require food, and players need to process more and more immigrants to gain enough money. In addition to the stricter security measures, the timer is counting down the six minute days. But players can find themselves in a standstill where, at the end of the day, when the clock strikes 6 PM, the security booth remains open and the current NPC does not leave. The interaction between the player and the NPC is considered void, so whether the player chooses to accept or deny the passport does not matter. Players can speak with the NPC for as long as they wish, scrutinize the passport, conduct security tests. There is this strange pause in effect, when players enter a non-corollary zone of the story-web. It is almost a self-contained “side-quest,” an event that will never be alluded to again. This is a weird zone for a game that’s main draw is the continual building of the character’s story. The game-space and game speed become isolated and frozen. It is a rare instance of inconsequentiality in a game that measures every player action. Past and present is grouped, fixed and flexible acts depict Papers, Please as a vehicle of gaming history. As Infocom advertised towards the intellectual gamer: "Through our prose, your imagination makes you part of our stories, in control of what you do and where you go - yet unable to predict or control the course of events" (Infocom 1984). This helps illustrate the inundation of compartmentalized events and side-quests in RPGs, and how narratives frequently feature storylines that have no effect on the main quest. There has been some discrepancy regarding narratives in games. Jesper Juul argues that narratives are fixed sequences in the past, while games are flexible sequences in the present (Juul). As shown in its saved-game screen and the limbo after 6 PM, Papers, Please manages to merge and manipulate gametime in a variety of ways.


Once a player makes a decision, the game changes course towards that set of endings. The elements of role-playing have been reduced from extensive sixty-hour adventures to a six hour playthrough comprised of six minute days, while still maintaining the forking paths narrative characteristic of western RPGs. A key difference between Papers, Please and simulation games such as SimCity (1989) is in the components of an ending and the classification of failure. In simulation games, the ending comes when the player performs a critical error: they did not gather enough resources to maintain their population, some element was ignored and eventually killed everything, a quantitative measurement was not controlled. The ending stems from neglect. But a victory can look very different: the player is rich, the ownership successful, the quest is won. In Papers, Please, victory looks identical to loss. When the player reaches the last few days, it is difficult to determine which endings are good or bad. A few selections: the player successfully topples the Arstotzka government, but remains employed as a border guard for the new EZIC regime; the player secures passports for his family and escapes Arstotzka to the neighboring Obristan, an identically communist border country; the player detains an EZIC agent to the praise of the Arstotzkan government; the EZIC responds by murdering the player’s family. In post-modernist fashion, Papers, Please illustrates the futility of a narrative. The player's robotic actions throughout the game, in the hopes of fulfillment and success as traditionally granted in games, consistently come up empty. Papers, Please illustrates this in its surface gameplay, the action of checking identification.


Rather than position the player as an EZIC navigating the shadows the topple the Communist government, or as an Arstotzka soldier surrounded by enemies, Papers, Please focuses the action on the mundane, the ``boring minutiae of discipline and confinement, which constitute the various apparatuses of control in contemporary societies" (Galloway 89). Papers, Please consistently distorts accepted mechanics from a variety of genre’s: its mechanical gameplay forces “human’s as players, not men of action” (Flusser 89). For all of the events occuring during playthrough, players remain in their station, viewing the events outside and around this delineated space just as the player views the events on their computer screen: parceled out excitement within itself. With endings similar in scope and outcome, the player focuses on the space of encounters during the game rather than its consequence. Through this allegorical interpretation of utilizing dialogue trees featured in monumentally long games, creating literal story-webs, and featuring political control as a gameplay focus, Pope raises Papers, Please from a n emotional manipulation with a push-pull of affect into a game about playing games, utilizing ``the more philosophical dignity of meanings" (Jameson 168).


Papers, Please touches on many topics regarding control via game systems and narratives. It reveals the underlying linearity in games, even those boasting freedom of choice. Even in the case of a flexible game such Papers, Please, where players are free to decide on their path through the narrative, the choices are preexisting, and the player is not so much creating a narrative as they are unlocking one. Expanded upon, even in procedurally generated games that appear to be completely random, there are a finite number of world combinations, however million that is. This is another example of Papers, Please bringing to the forefront game systems that are traditionally glossed over. As ever-present and oppressive the cold war paranoia and communist domination is in the world of Astotzka, the vast systems of informatics control are just as present, albeit less obvious, in video games. To give an example from theorist Vilem Flusser: “Is a person free simply because he is able to flee? When I leave the first contingence so that I may enter another one at the same level, I am a refugee" (Flusser 34). Similar from the player's flight from Arstotzka to Obristan, from checkpoint officer under the Arstotzka regime or the EZIC's, Papers, Please utilizes a variety of elements to illustrate the illusory freedoms in video games.


  Papers, Please sets an example of combining not only the player and the systems within the game, but from the context in which the game is played. According to game designer and theorist Katie Salen, this is where meaningful play emerges. (Salen 32). Dialogue trees are no longer physical manifestations, but diagetic player action, player’s map their game-world and past experiences on a physical field, and a tradition of interactive narrative is integrated into a modern medium. With these elements, Papers, Please demonstrates the systems of control traditionally found within the world of the game's narrative, in the creation of video game narratives, and as represented by video games themselves.

## Works Cited
- Flusser, V. The Shape of Things. London: Reaktion, 1999. Print.


- --- The Freedom of the Migrant: Objections to Nationalism. Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 2003. Print.


- Friedman, T. Electric Dreams: Computers in American Culture. New York: NYU Press, 2005. Print.


- Galloway, A. Gaming: Essays on Algorithmic Culture. London: The University of Minnesota Press, 2006. Print.


- Jameson, F. Signatures of the Visible. New York: Routledge, 1992. Print.


- Juul, J. A Clash Between Game and Narrative. Bergen: Digital Arts and Culture Conference.
2003. Online.


- Newman, J. Videogames. New York: Routledge, 2004. Print.


- Nitsche, M. Game Spaces. London: The MIT Press, 2008. Print.


- Perron, B., Wolf, Mark J. P. The Video Game Theory Reader 2. New York: Routledge, 2009.
Print.


- Salen, K. Rules of Play. London: The MIT Press, 2003. Print.


- Tavinor, G. The Art of Videogames. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009. Print.


- von Borries, F. Space Time Play. Computer Games, Architecture, and Urbanism: The Next Level.
Berlin: Birkhauser, 2007. Print.


- Wardrip-Fruin, N. Expressive Processing: Digital Fictions, Computer Games, and Software
Studies. London: The MIT Press, 2009. Print.
