---
layout: post
title: First post!
---

## Monetizing Twitch, Kickstarter, and the Imaged­Image
### May 15, 2014


My projects this semester use video games to show theories such as the rhizome, spectatorship and viewer separation, and detournement. Since its introduction early on in Mediologies II, the concept of a rhizome as not only a decentered, anti­genealogical mode of operation, but also as a representation of function over content and origin, has influenced projects relating to ludology and crowdsourcing. One conclusion during this work was that the underexplored functioning of video games gives an alternative glimpse at the mentioned topics from a perspective of computation and digitization, as well as an impressive, malleable totalization1. Furthermore, a video game can subsume any type of media or artistic influence in its content as well as its presentation. As I demonstrated throughout the semester in my projects, the method of the game’s play is less important than its formation and presentation.


I will present a closer look at several of these projects. First, the Internet sensation Twitch Plays Pokemon as a deviation of traditional spectatorship through assemblage formation and levels of abstraction as defined by Laura Marks; second, the participatory artwork and experiences that emerge through what is becoming an unprivileged medium with a reading of Jacques Ranciere’s The Emancipated Spectator; third, the monetization and cultivation of the video game image, such as those featured on the crowdsource website Kickstarter, through comparative definitions from Brian Rotman and Hito Steyerl. In this paper, I will illustrate how alternative use of a medium from its designed function—entertainment, in the case of video games—forms a type of nomadism; by looking at how a video game “functions as a machine rather than what it means . . . whether it works, how it works, and who it works for” (Negotiations 22), new pathways of play and critical thought emerge. I attempt to show the positive and negatives outcomes of this emergence, beginning with Twitch Plays Pokemon.


Beginning in the spring of 2014, millions of people participated in Twitch Plays Pokemon, a randomized playthrough of a video game broadcasted over the Internet. Twitch.com allows “streamers” to broadcast their computer or television screens over the Internet while viewers watch in different locations across the globe, and Pokemon is a game in which the player captures and battle creatures, popularized in the early 90s and since commodified. In Twitch Plays Pokemon, the two products are combined. Here’s how it works: viewers type directional and button­input commands into the scrolling chat along the right side of the screen. An automated bot sends these commands, on a 20 second delay, into the gameworld of Pokemon, which are then displayed along the center of the screen. The avatar of the game then performs these actions. The viewers control the game through a series of abstractions. As such, thousands of viewers are collaboratively playing Pokemon as abstract machines in a concrete assemblage, and represent not only Laura Marks’ three levels of formation but also an unlimited potential trajectory: the potential of the image or the actual as powered by this inputted code; the image of the game, with button inputs as information and code, and the infinity and energy of thousands of users powering this potential; and the infinite channeled into the code, displayed on the screen, and then displayed as the image. The virtual, or infinity, the code, or information, and the actual, or the image (Enfoldment and Infinity).


Twitch Plays Pokemon has an internal trajectory and infinite growth. Marks continues: “Algorithmic organizing principles set up a grid of repeatable units. That grid is subdivided again and again by the actions of users, giving rise to seemingly infinite series of ever more detailed events of great variety and particularity” (Enfoldment and Infinity). With players numbering in the millions, motivations
￼differ. While progress and completion is the normative, primary goal, groups have popped up to impede this progress, such as anarchist groups that offer random and destructive control inputs—attempting to dismiss owned Pokemon, for example, or walking in the wrong direction—while reactionary groups have formed to counteract these anarchists, using button inputs that do not forward progress directly, but which expect the destructive actions and attempt to preemptively counteract them in mutually blind game of cat and mouse. But on the macro level, the assemblage ebbs and flows with one another, and creates a wellspring of social data, behavior, and networks.


While the results of this experiment are dismissed as random by critics, the action and input is more interesting than whether the players finish the title or not (they do). As Marks says, “The longer
you engage with the Unfolding Object, the more the simple shape reveals even greater complexity,
logical depth, and social extension” (Enfoldment and Infinity). This assemblage is changing and reforming into sects and groups with different goals, and during this period, the Internet became (or continued to become) indispensable for cataloging and recording content, with chat text and a timeline of events forming a topological manipulation or mapping of history. While Twitch Plays Pokemon began as a stream on one website, it rhizomatically evolved into a much richer culture hinged on cooperation. But I am not so much interested in the content and culture so much as the viewing experience’s possibility space.


Upon first watching the stream, the viewer may feel disoriented. Twitch Plays Pokemon is very much a haptic experience. Marks says, “Islamic aesthetics has some suggestions for Western art theory, because it shifts the site of meaning from the image to the body of the viewer” (Enfoldment and Infinity). The stream catalyzes a non­visual mode of experience that takes place in the body of the spectator, and indeed as the production of place within the body. The array of letters scrolling down the screen mimics
￼that of Matrix code or the ticker board of Wall Street, in a gesture towards Patricia Pisters’ neuro­image, which I will touch on later.


Twitch Plays Pokemon relates to the work of the Oulipo as well, in a modernized version of changing the possibility space—in the Oulipo’s case, of writing—with a narrowing of the gulf between active play and passive looking. The rules that govern the space of play do not merely create the experience for the gamer, and the viewer, but also construct game’s meaning. Th Twitch stream has facilitated representations in the physical world based not only on its manufactured content but also its methodology in the form of mathematics, religion, and game theory, to name a few. The range of play literally and digitally shifts in accommodation of dual styles of input, which is represented by a bar along top of the stream that oscillates between “anarchy” and “democracy”: with anarchy, there is an avant­garde explosion of play, and a subversion of traditional rules, in an anything­goes style of input; with democracy, there are self­enforced rules similar to those of Oulipian authors, and voting for accepted inputs takes on its more traditional method.


Aesthetics and political judgments intertwine and overlap in the distribution and sharing of ideas. Yet the platform is still constrained by a formal freedom of rules determined by the streamer, and no matter how anarchical the stream appears, it is always under control of the performer behind the screen. As Zizek explains, “Formal freedom is the freedom of choice within the coordinates of the existing power relations, while actual freedom designates the site of an intervention that undermine these very coordinates” (On Belief 544).


Moving away from a specific instance utilizing the Twitch platform, I will give a macro look on how it exploits spectator capital of attention. For viewers, tuning into a stream and its owner comes with an innate pedagogy based on factors such as gender, performance, and personality. Female gamers,
￼with exceptions, frequently attract large numbers of viewers despite not actually doing much in the way of (video game related) entertainment; professional gamers, regardless of gender, can have upwards of 20,000 viewers at one time; and streamers who are simply entertaining can bring in similar numbers. But the platform has gradually become increasingly monetized since its 2011 inception: viewers are encouraged to buy subscriptions and watch advertisements as a way of funding the streamer, and game companies have begun to promote new and popular games with giveaways and prizes to viewers as
long as participants promote the company on social media, or watch stream advertisements.


The divide between the spectator and viewer exists not only because of social capital and the
exponential popularity a streamer receives with each new viewer, but also because of how the platform is structured. Twitch is not designed as a two­way webcam or chat tool similar to Skype. The visual image is only transmitted one­way, from the streamer to the masses, and the streamer can never view their audience. In other words, the voice of God narrative has been modernized into an image. The streamer produces entertainment for the viewer, who fund the streamer through attention, both socially and monetarily by watching advertisements. The viewer has become a “prosumer.” From Patricia Pisters:
<blockquote>Another characteristic of digital software culture is that social software—software that has enabled the emergence of Web 2.0—has transformed the cultural logics of the Internet itself from a hypertext environment of interactive applications into a “participatory future” populated by so­called prosumers (active content­producing consumers). (The Neuro­Image 10)</blockquote>
The tangible and intangible restrictions on participation therefore create a natural rift between viewer and streamer akin to Ranciere’s depiction of lectures, performances, and talks. Twitch Plays Pokemon,
while not perfect, utilizes the platform in a more rhizomatic form than its traditional one­way transmission.


￼While still monetized—and the capitalistic aspect is outside the scope of this paper—Twitch Plays Pokemon lessens the inactivity and non­participatory aspect of spectatorship. Regardless of whether the popularity of the stream was due to the cultural significance and sweet spot nostalgia of a game that is well­known and well­loved by an age group who both grew up with the series and make up the largest percentage of Twitch’s viewers, its novel and chaotic nature that led to a wide­spread, if short­lived, inundation of images, videos, and lore, or the diminished barrier between spectator and participant in an worldwide assemblage of users, Twitch Plays Pokemon marks an acceptance, reconfiguration, and transition of visual fields. From Anne Friedberg:


<blockquote>We must add computer screens to our conceptualization of the cinema and its screens . . . spectators are ‘users’ with an ‘interface’—variable in versions of remotes, mice, keyboards, touch screens, joysticks, goggles and gloves, and body suits. The apparatus we came to know
as ‘the cinema’ is being displaced by systems of circulation and transmission, which begin to link the video screens of the computer and television with the dialogic interactivity of the telephone. (The End of Cinema)</blockquote>


Media is transitioning into undifferentiated systems of information transference, and several friends have told me that they no longer watch films or television, only Twitch.


This bridging of participation and spectatorship, sender and receiver is further examined in Ranciere’s The Emancipated Spectator. In this speech, Ranciere discusses the pedagogical divide between viewer and performer, in several guises, the specifics of participatory art, and the realization and acceptance of knowing when knowledge is not known, or “the self­equality of intelligence in all its manifestations” (10). Ranciere is less interested in the autonomy of a work of art, but our autonomy to our experience in relation, similar to the thesis of this paper. There is an idolization from the perspective of a viewer while watching an athlete, a performer on stage, or an instructor in a lecture hall, something akin to an absence or lack in comparison to the performer. Ranciere references the alienation inherent in the spectacle, an inequality of intelligence that Jacotot calls stultification. The term “emancipation” refers to stultification’s opposite, the equality of intelligence: “There are not two sorts of intelligence separated by a gulf . . . From the ignoramus spelling out signs, to the scientist who constructs hypotheses, the same intelligence is always at work—an intelligence that transforms signs into other signs” (10).


Unconsciously, the performer and the spectator fill their roles on opposite sides of the rift: the pupil lacks the knowledge of ignorance and the knowledge of the exact distance separating knowledge from ignorance, and the performer inhabits the role of an authority for no other reason than the attention granted to them. But the solution is not a simple reversal of roles, switching the locus of power to viewer from performer, in a utopian ideal of “giving the people a voice,” simply because this binary shifting is unproductive. From Claire Bishop: “The binary of active/passive always ends up in deadlock: either a disparagement of the spectator because he does nothing, while the performers on stage do something—or the converse claim that those who act are inferior to those who are able to look, contemplate ideas, and have critical distance on the world” (Artificial Hells 37). As such, Plato’s Allegory of the Cave can be read as an allegory of inequality. The problem of spectatorship, and the commodification of attention, therefore, is not the supposed immature or unimportant content of something like Twitch Plays Pokemon, the “boys­club” audience and streamers, or even the advertisements viewers are forced to watch, but the one­way face­of­God transmission built into the platform that stymies interaction and participation.
One way to rectify this idolization is a the replacement of the one voice for the many. Similarly, the one image can be replaced with several. Layered images, such as the stacked information during Twitch Plays Pokemon, or the more traditional layering of the webcam video placed atop a streamed image, is a characteristic of what Brian Rotman terms the imaged­image: “Depending on the mode of combination, imaged­images can resemble forms of collage and photo­montage that, however, unlike
￼their chemical precursors, can exhibit previously unattainable flows of visual information and affect between their constituent images” (Becoming Beside Ourselves). As previously stated with Marks, the imaged­image can encourage a haptic response in the viewer, as well as heightened affective response stemming from the barrage of stimuli. Yet there is a compromise between the clarity of image and the culture or genealogy tacked onto its transmission. So far, I have gone from a specific instance of spectatorship and the image, to a broader look at its platform; now I would like to take a closer look at how combinations of images can produce an affective response.
Rotman describes images that can be “copied endlessly without degradation,” and reformed and blended into collage or photo­montage that “re­calibrates space­time polarities of near/far and
then/now, reconfiguring possibilities of presence and subjectivity (23). Rotman continues his analysis of a “doubled iconicity” that threatens hierarchal thought by using the example of the alphabet, and is confronted by foreign self­depiction and enunciation (19). With images remixed and layered atop one another, the effect has the potentiality to overwhelm the viewer and short­circuit traditional, pedagogical thought. And while my summation does an injustice to the eloquence and depth of Rotman’s writing, there is still an absence of what these images can look like, as well as the imaged­image’s form. With this, even Rotman states that any attempt will be premature in the face of these technologies and modes in flux (19). But one example that came to mind was the format of montage. Contemporarily used to quickly convey information of the passage of time, montage was initially used politically via the inundation of affecting images (at least with Vertov and Eisenstein). These qualities are embedded historically and culturally, and while Rotman addresses montage and its affective capabilities, he primarily focuses on the transformative macro­level and possibility space of the image, and what is represents, rather than what it is specifically used for. With this, what immediately comes to my mind are
￼the imaged­images used in advertising, as discussed in the commodification of Twitch. They are also used by the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter.


Kickstarter features creators requesting money and attention from viewers in assistance with completing projects. Many of these projects featured slickly made images, with overlapping data sets
and informatics of crunch goals and donation amounts, and videos of project teams asking for donations while utilizing affective terminology such as “plea for help” and “this project wouldn’t exist without you.” More accurately, the project would not exist without “you[r money and social networks].” What advertising, charity websites and documentaries, and the manipulative use of the imaged­image all sell is affect. Kickstarter takes a percentage of all donations or “buy­ins,” and there is little monetary security
for either the project groups or the user. What’s more, capital and project progress are not the only measured metrics. Project visitors are tracked via website click­through, and while users looks for a potential project to support like the marketed utopia of philanthropy, Kickstarter can track visitors with
an array of informatic tools that encapsulates the mirroring effect of browsing described by Friedberg: “The shopper is dialectically both the observer and the observed, the transported and the confined, the dioramic and the panoptic subject” (914). When the product is intangible, producers harness consumers libidinal feelings of excitement, passion, and satisfaction in a web of virtual connectivity between these immaterial goods and other consumers. From Hardt and Negri: “Caring labor is certainly entirely immersed in the corporeal, the somatic, but the affects it produces are nonetheless immaterial. What affective labor produces are social networks” (Empire, 292). These projects instill a sense of
togetherness, both in the feeling of supporting the underdog and in bolstering the community of fans.
Like overlapping images creating a photographic montage, people overlap and connect as affective
￼machines in a montage of harvested attention and production. The only unmolested users in this relationship are the Kickstarter employees.


Moving back to rhizomatic exchange and the dissemination of images, I’ve noticed a distinction between Rotman’s imaged­image and Hito Steyerl’s analysis of degraded images from The Wretched
of the Screen. Similar to how Rotman describes a rhizomatic process of seeing exactly reproduced and stacked images as lateral and nonhierarchical, Steyerl makes a similar conclusion with images that are degraded in quality through transmission: images repeatedly compressed into smaller file sizes for sharing through email, found footage blown­up to large displays in art­film theaters, and images shot with DIY
or concealed equipment, to name a few. The image quality and method of transfer can speak of its
history and produce a reaction that is discrete from the actual visual content image. Less important to Steyerl is the capability or consequence of layering images than its method of circulation and creation.
An old object has a history, simply put, and an object distorted and compressed can signify a history of community and information dispersal. To name recent examples that demonstrate this theory, the shaky­cam found­footage effect, now a trope, is used in horror films to create a sense of dread or disorientation.


An image can be shared just as equally whether it is clear or pixelated, of course, but the ability
to manipulate an image’s aesthetic makes this distinction of capitalistic and hierarchal subversion more difficult to detect. More disturbingly, companies are releasing software that gives images a “poor” quality: the vintage Instagram filter and Adobe Photoshop editing are two examples. What happens to
the indexicality and traceability of an image when its primitive objectiveness is replaced with a subjective manufacturing? I would say that the outcome of something like Twitch Plays Pokemon is even less important when faced with this distinction. While the commands chosen by the algorithm is random, the
￼user­input has to be objective. This is a powerful distinction, and can be thought of in another way as how a camera and a photo have an objective relationship, despite the user’s intentions, framing, and timing. Yet one thing amidst all of these platforms runs true. Even in the virtual world of video games, as I showed in my project of a digital Times Square, there are advertisements for virtual products.
Consider the aesthetic quality of the discussed platforms. The low­pixeled Pokemon is
“dressed up” by Twitch with modern video effects, amenities, and scrolling data and information. These updates are meant to further enrapture the viewer, who, unaffected by the social or psychological portion of the content, will perhaps be enraptured by the flashing data. Similarly in Kickstarter, videos summarizing the project are slickly produced, and frequently demonstrate Rotman’s concept of the imaged­image with a combination of melancholic music and dog­eyed artists outlining the necessity of their work. On the other hand, a low­resolution video shot on a camera phone can prove just as affecting as any hi­tech video effect.
For my project on detournement, I looked at the effect of the imaged image within the cityscape of video game worlds. I looked at work from Benjamin Bardou and Phil Solomon, who both take footage of video games to make new media art. I combined the artists’ footage and set it to upbeat music to contrast these mediations of consumerism, and updated the footage to include the stigmatization of women.


Another example of detournement against consumerism that we studied was Jean­Luc Godard. While Godard is still problematic in several ways (mainly his preference for beautiful women), he lays bare his process of filmmaking, and the division between actor and audience. In the opening scenes of the screened film 2 or 3 Things I Know About Her, Godard shows the underlying production and costume choices made within the film. His actress performs stage directions while he narrates these
￼actions, and describes what the actress is wearing. From his writings about the film, titled “One Should Put Everything Into a Film”: “I am constantly asking questions, I watch myself filming, and you hear me thinking aloud. In other words it isn’t a film, it’s an attempt at film and is presented as such” (239).
When Godard says “It doesn’t mean anything” while describing his actress and her character, he is saying that film is spectacular, and that ultimately nothing on the screen is anything other than a sequence of images, of pictures one after the other. Similar to Friedberg and Baudrillard’s thesis­­that technological mediums are becoming one in the same­­, for Godard, film is all one image, no matter the content. One need look no further than Godard's Historie(s) du Cinema, for an example of the
staggered imaged image effect.


This encompassment is symbolized in 2 or 3 Things’ coffee cup scene, an affect­image ripe
sequence metabolizing filmmaking through its process of creation. Instead of the quantitative addition of sugar to coffee to cup, Godard depicts this combination on a galactic, qualitative level. From the Deleuze dictionary: “When a teaspoon of sugar is dissolved in a glass of water, the ‘whole’ is not the container and its contents, but the action of creation taking place in the ionisation of the molecules of sugar, a sort of ‘pure ceaseless becoming which passes through states’” (10). Through the examination of perception on a molecular level, from the components of a cup of coffee to the detangling of the mise­en­scéne of an actress playing a character against the backdrop of Paris, the privilege and
mystique of filmmaking and performance is eliminated. A key, overlooked aspect of detournement is the creation of a standalone entity from the two mixed variables. Through Godard’s “anything goes” technique of filmmaking and discussion of literature, aesthetics, consumerism, nothing is sacred and thus there is no pedagogy. Except that of who has the capability of filming and releasing movies, something that is far, far outside the scope of this paper.


￼What was within the scope of this paper are the topics introduced during this class by examining Twitch Played Pokemon. This specific social experiment encouraged comparisons to rhizome and assemblage theory from Deleuze and Guattari, and led, by taking a macro look at the Twitch platform itself, used for streamers to promote themselves to viewers while monetizing the content, to a demonstration of how the platform embodies the criticisms put forth by Ranciere in his Emancipated Spectator. Furthermore, a closer look at the staggering of images and information supplied by the Twitch Plays Pokemon screen is a jumping­off point for a comparison between Rotman's
imaged­image and Steyerl's defense of poor images. This comparison continues with a critical look at how the Kickstarter platform uses imagery for monetary gain, and an exhuming of the power and allure of the image by Godard’s detournement. While both platforms provide accessible methods of connectivity and participation, the capitalization of both platforms threatens their social progress and instead devolve them into another monetized medium. I hope I have offered an encompassing look at not only the content of the visual, but also its structuring and method of transmission. Throughout the year we have looked at our perception of images, and I hope that this paper clarifies these concepts with contemporary works and platforms.


## Works Cited

- Barron, W. R. J. Trawthe and Treason: The Sin of Gawain Reconsidered. Manchester:
Manchester UP, 1980. Print.
- Brewer, Derek. “The Social Context of Medieval English Literature.” The New Pelican Guide
to English Literature 1. Medieval Literature Part One: Chaucer and the Alliterative Tradition. Ed. Boris Ford. London: Penguin, 1995. 15­40. Print.
- Bishop, Claire. Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship. Verso Books, 2012. Print.
- Deleuze, Gilles. Negotiations 1972­1990. Columbia University Press, 1995. Print.
- Friedberg, Anne. “The End of Cinema: Multimedia and Technological Change.” Film Theory and Criticism: Introductory Readings. Vol. 6th. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. 914–926. Print.
- Hardt, Professor Michael, and Antonio Negri. Empire. Harvard University Press, 2009. Print.
- Kunkel, Benjamin. "Into the Big Tent." Rev. Of Valences of the Dialectic, by Fredric Jameson. London Review of Books 32.8 (2010): 12­16. 2 May 2014. <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v32/n08/benjamin­kunkel/into­the­big­tent>
- Marks, Laura U, Enfoldment and Infinity: An Islamic Genealogy of New Media Art. Mit Press, 2010. Print.
- Parr, Adrian. The Deleuze Dictionary Revised Edition. Oxford University Press, 2010. Print.
- Pisters, Patricia. The Neuro­Image: A Deleuzian Film­Philosophy of Digital Screen Culture. Stanford University Press, 2012. Print.
- Steyerl, Hito, and Franco Berardi. The Wretched of the Screen. Sternberg Press, 2012. Print. Rancière, Jacques. The Emancipated Spectator. Verso Books, 2011. Print.
- Rotman, Brian. Becoming Beside Ourselves: The Alphabet, Ghosts, and Distributed
Human Being. Duke University Press, 2008. Print. Žižek, Slavoj. On Belief. Routledge, 2001. Print.
